Design proposal: vParquet3 (#2525)
grafana/tempo: docs/design-proposals/2023-05 vParquet3.md

  * [Compaction](#compaction)
  * [Tooling](#tooling)

## Context
The current Parquet schema stores span attributes in the repeated group `Attrs`.
The group contains a single column for all attribute keys and separate columns for the corresponding values (depending on the value type).
The size of the span attribute columns combined contribute to 30-70% of the overall block size.
To search for a specific attribute, it is necessary to access this large chunk of data.
The analysis of Tempo blocks from different use cases has further revealed that the 10 most frequently used span attributes are responsible for over 50% of the overall attribute size.

A benchmark with a schema that stores the 5 most frequently occurring attributes in dedicated columns showed significant performance improvements:

* The block size decreased by ~10%
* Compressed size of the generic attribute columns was reduced by ~40%
* The search speed for queries without matches improved by ~80% for attributes with dedicated columns and ~70% for generic attributes columns
* The search speed for queries returning matches improved by ~50% for attributes with dedicated columns and ~30% for generic attribute columns

> The amount and kind of span attributes varies a lot between use cases and the above benchmark was conducted tracing data that captured a lot of span attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The amount and kind of span attributes varies a lot between use cases and the above benchmark was conducted with tracing data that captured a lot of span attributes.
```

Therefore, the search speed improvements that can be achieved by storing span attributes in dedicated columns,
can deviate from the above results.

> However, the data still shows that dedicated columns for span attributes that can be tuned to a specific use-case can improve Tempo’s search performance significantly.

Reviewer: "use case" was used above without hyphen
```suggestion
However, the data still shows that dedicated columns for span attributes that can be tuned to a specific use case can improve Tempo’s search performance significantly.
```

This document describes how dedicated columns for span attributes will be implemented in Tempo.

## Goals and requirements

> There are different ways dedicated columns for attributes can be added to Tempo's block format and how they are configured and tuned for the specific workload.

Reviewer 2: this sentence is confusing to me. i think you could just drop it and the point is clear.

Author: Agree, dropped.

The main goal for the next iteration of the block format `vParquet3` is to be able to manually configure dedicated attribute columns for very heavy workloads.
To keep the scope small only the following features are implemented for now:

> * Attributes with string values can be promoted to dedicated columns on resource and span level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Only attributes with string values can be promoted to dedicated columns on resource and span level
```

> * Tenants can manually configure which attributes are promoted to dedicated columns

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Attributes promoted to dedicated columns can be manually configured per tenant
```

> * Support for changing dedicated column configurations

Author: The goal is being explicit that dynamic columns can be changed at runtime.

  * Compactor treats different configs as different encodings
  * Queriers read blocks with different configured columns
* Provide tooling and documentation that enables tenants to find good attributes to promote to dedicated columns
  * Find attributes that contribute the most to block size

>   * (Stretch) Find attributes that are search the most by

Reviewer 2: by .... ?

This could be nice. Maybe some kind of query-frontend log analysis tool? I'd even be satisfied for some documented Loki queries that show what are the most commonly searched for attributes.

Overall tho I agree this is stretch and shouldn't hold up the project.

Reviewer 2: Ah, apologies. I thought this was an incomplete sentence and you meant to type something after "by". I understand now.

Future iterations may support additional features:

* Workload analysis to determine suitable dedicated column configurations which can be used to make suggestions or to automate the configuration

> * Fully dynamic schema that allows to add dedicated columns for different data types and encodings (e.g. delta or run length encoding)

Reviewer 2: <3

* Apply config dynamically to old blocks during compaction

## Implementation

### Schema with spare columns

> There are two approaches for storing span attributes in dedicated columns in Tempo.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure reviewing this again is necessary. I'd just skip it and go straight to the description of what we're doing.

To keep the added complexity manageable, dedicated columns for span attributes are implemented using the spare columns approach for now.

In the analyzed use cases, the 20 span attributes that contributed most to the overall attribute size,
were almost exclusively attributes with string values.
Given that the benchmark achieved good results with 5 dedicated columns,
it can be expected that extending the schema by 10 spare columns for string values is sufficient to achieve good performance improvements for most use cases.

The following code outlines the schema changes:

```go
type DedicatedAttrs struct {
    String01 *string `parquet:",snappy,optional,dict"`
    String02 *string `parquet:",snappy,optional,dict"`
    ...
    String10 *string `parquet:",snappy,optional,dict"`
}

type Span struct {
    ...
    DedicatedAttrs DedicatedAttrs `parquet:""`
}
```

To execute TraceQL queries it is necessary to know which attribute is assigned to which spare column.
Since the assignment of spare columns to specific attributes changes over time, it is necessary to store this information for each block.

> Tempo stores metadata about each Block in the meta.json file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tempo stores metadata about each Block in the `meta.json` file.
```

> The schema of this file can be extended such that it contains the assignment information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The schema of this file will be extended such that it contains the assignment information:
```

```go
{
    ...
    "dedicatedColumns": [
        {"scope": "span", "name": "attrA", "type": "string"},
        {"scope": "span", "name": "attrB", "type": "string"},
        {"scope": "span", "name": "attrC", "type": "string"},
    ]
}
```

## Configuration and overrides

> Dedicated columns have been part of the Parquet-based formats since the first version.

Reviewer 2: this raises the question: are we planning on removing the old dedicated columns in favor of this new model?

Author: In future iterations, likely yes. For now, this new format is only an extension over the current schema, so they stay.

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with this, but would love to see the old special columns removed. It will clean up a lot of code.

Although it is possible to implement compaction across different column assignments, this is not strictly necessary:
The assignment of span attributes to spare columns is not expected to change frequently therefore not compacting blocks with different assignments does not have a large impact on the compaction result.

To handle compaction correctly the compaction block selector is adjusted such that blocks with different spare column assignments are not selected for compaction.

<img src="./assets/vparquet3-compaction.jpg">

## Tooling

A key factor in the performance of dedicated columns is the attributes that are used for them.
We want to include tools that help operators find good candidates for dedicated columns.
What makes an attribute a good candidate will most likely vary from user to user, but there are some basic rules that can help us find them.

From our analysis of Tempo blocks, we’ve found that attributes that occupy the most space in a block usually have the biggest impact on performance when promoted to dedicated columns.
Even when queries don’t search by those attributes.

> A lot of work to help analyze parquet blocks has already been done in parquet-cli.

Author: Yup! Missed it when copying from the original doc. Thanks
